13.8 billion years ago the universe was
born and within a second of its
existence
there was gravity particles mass and
space today is incomparably larger and
more voluminous as superclusters of
galaxies lie in the dark metallic
filaments across distances so vast that
even the fastest thing within that space
takes millions of years to travel
meaningful distances as we learn more
about how we think the universe began we
are beginning to look towards the end
how will it become devoid of life stars
galaxies or even cease to exist entirely
no one could say for sure what the
ultimate fate of the universe will be
but with advancements in technology we
are beginning to better understand the
metrics and energies that will be
instrumental in the end of everything
and the likely possibilities are as
unsettling as they are fascinating
[Music]
in order to predict the distant future
of the universe we must consider three
things the expansion of space-time the
motions of galaxies around us and lastly
the cause of these behaviors the first
thing to consider is the way that the
universe around us is actually expanding
it's easy to think of the universe as
this magnificent cosmic crystal bull
expanding outwards of the speed of light
but this is far from the truth
when space expands new space is created
everywhere equally all points in
space-time expand at the same rate from
the space between you and your computer
to the farthest reaches of the oldest
galaxies the more space expands the more
space there is that can expand and so
the process accelerates with time think
of it like a balloon inflating but we
are on the outside not the inside no
matter where we stand on the surface the
surface area always increases at the
same rate and as such the center is
everywhere this expansion is very weak
and so gravity can hold objects that are
gravitationally bound together like you
me earth the rest of the galaxy and our
local galactic group however at
intergalactic distances beyond the local
group objects are receding away from us
and we see evidence of this through
redshift the process of the universe's
expansion elongating visible light
turning it red this recession means that
the larger the present-day universe
becomes the larger the distance has
become between us and other pockets of
the universe the expansion rate is
currently estimated to be about 68
kilometers per second per megaparsec
this means that right here space is
expanding in all directions at that rate
but the further out you go the faster
objects are being pushed away from us a
mega parsec is a unit of measurement
equivalent to about 3.3 million light
years so about 6 mega parsecs or just
under 20 million light years away the
space between us and those galaxies is
growing at a rate of over 400 kilometers
per second the intergalactic distances
between us and galaxies like Messier 87
I see one one zero one and gnz at 11 is
growing all the time this also means
that at a sufficiently distant point
galaxies will be moving away from us
faster than light speed this doesn't
break any laws of physics as they
themselves are not moving that fast but
the distance between us and there
is growing more than light can travel in
the same increment of time this means
that there is a point relative to us
beyond which light will never reach us
the cosmic event horizon the boundary
that separates our observable universe
from the rest of the universe which we
will never be able to see or detect once
galaxies cross this point they become
causally disconnected and will have a
little hope there may have been of
Transportation and communication and
eventually even observation of any kind
will be gone these galaxies will be lost
and we will never see them again and the
worst part over 95% of the galaxies in
the observable universe have already
crossed this point of no return for
travel and communication for us all
because of the aggressive nature of the
universe's expansion but what is causing
this kind of expansion well we don't
know the underlying mechanisms behind it
but we call it dark energy don't let
this name fool you
dark energy is simply our term for the
giant IOU to future scientists that we
currently attribute to the accelerated
expansion of the universe we don't know
how or why it works but leading theories
have suggested everything from a
naturally occurring byproduct of space
to a new type of energy field to random
fluctuations at the lowest level of
interaction what we do know however is
that it is responsible for the
accelerating expansion of the universe
normal matter and energy cannot make the
universe behave in this way and as the
density of matter Falls the density of
dark energy appears to remain consistent
because more of it pops into existence
with the increasing volume of space
light travels along this ever expanding
space and it's wavelengths become
increasingly red shifted and this is
exactly how we discovered dark energy
when in 1998 the high Zed supernova
search team analyzed distant supernovae
and discovered that the universe was not
only expanding but it appeared to be
getting faster it appeared to have
expanded more in the latter half of its
life when dark energy took over the
universe entered a new era the dark
energy dominated era marking the point
at which matter domination ended around
nine point eight billion years after the
Big Bang a day which would prove to be a
tipping point for the universe
with these three things considered we
can start to get a better idea of how
the next few trillion years will play
out in several billion years the Milky
Way and Andromeda galaxies will collide
emerge and eventually dozens of smaller
dwarf galaxies in the local group will
also be drawn to this new giant
starburst galaxy with the unpopular name
milk dromeda everything else beyond our
local group pocket was flung beyond our
reach in the earliest nanoseconds of
time and so gravity cannot counteract it
as it recedes away from us as the amount
of dark energy continues to elongate and
expand the universe even the nearest
galaxies to us we'll cross the cosmic
horizon and within a hundred and fifty
billion years everything beyond our
local supercluster will be invisible and
undetectable this curtain of darkness
will continue to swallow everything
beyond the boundaries of our galaxy and
eventually it will become impossible to
tell that anything exists beyond the
edges of milk dromeda nothing
intelligent that emerges in this post
intergalactic era will ever be able to
know what lies beyond the apparent end
of their galaxy and this will be the
same right across the universe
furthermore this expansion and recession
of the observable universe has as many
practical problems as it does
existential nightmares with all galaxies
flung beyond the reach of each other new
galaxies will not be able to form and
the current galaxies of the universe
will start to die out new stars will be
unable to form as well and the existing
ones will either collapse - white
dwarves or go supernova gradually the
great fires of the universe will be
extinguished one by one as the galaxies
they formed it and become unbound and
then 100 trillion years in the future
the final long living red and white
dwarfs will burn out the last of their
fuel and fade into black dwarfs and the
universe will know its second Dark Age
only this dark age will likely last for
an eternity
and before long one of the universe's
primordial signatures will be the last
thing to go out the photons at the CMB
will fade further and eventually become
undetectable the afterglow of the Big
Bang will glow no more
even at this point the universe can
still be considered young only the
supermassive black holes of the universe
seeded perhaps by the primordial black
holes which emerged when the universe
was only one second old will survive and
at ten to the power of 40 years they
will have consumed the last of the
matter and will single-handedly dominate
the dark cold universe this rain will
last an unbelievably long time but it is
not eternal these black holes will
eventually evaporate due to Hawking
radiation and perhaps as far as ten to
the power of a hundred years in the
future these black holes will finally
fizzle out of existence and the universe
will be a dark cold sparse void
trillions upon trillions of mega parsecs
in diameter it will then be powerless to
its ultimate fate exactly what that will
be well scientists have narrowed it down
to four possible options what caused the
Big Bang it seems a bit unbelievable
that something especially something like
the universe came from nothing what
makes more sense or more sense to us at
least is that something came before and
as general relativity developed in the
1900s a somewhat optimistic hypothesis
for the fate of the universe was
described the universe is full of matter
whose properties are determined by mass
and whose interactions are dominated by
gravity more mass means more gravity
which will pull everything together
currently we believe that the density of
dark energy will remain constant as
matters density Falls but if there's
more matter than we currently predict or
less dark energy then eventually this
will cause the universe's expansion to
slow down and ultimately stop and it
will then begin contracting as the
gravity of the objects within pulls it
back in on itself
if this theory is correct then within a
few trillion years causally disconnected
galaxies would be flung back within our
reach causing galaxy mergers all over
the place resulting in the births of
millions of new galaxies instead of them
all dying out in secluded pockets
however this contraction is
unsustainable because as the volume of
the universe shrinks the density and
temperature within Rises eventually
stars and planets will be fried from the
outside as the universe is transformed
and even atoms will break apart into
unbound elementary particles in fact all
that will be able to survive are the
black holes of the universe and these
will gradually merge into larger and
larger black holes as they are brought
within range of each other by the ever
shrinking universe in the final moments
of cosmic time these black holes will
unite and merge into one gigantic ultra
massive black hole trillions of times
more massive than anything we can
currently observe and it will contain
the entire universes information finally
this black hole will consume all of
space-time devouring itself in the
process and return the universe to that
which it came from an infinitesimally
small and dense singularity some people
even take this a step further as opposed
that we live in an oscillatory universe
and that the contraction back into a
singularity will ultimately trigger a
similar chain of events to those of the
Big Bang and a new universe would emerge
and rapidly expand forming new space
with similar attributes in a cyclic or
fashion some believe that this has been
happening forever
and will continue to happen infinitum
crazy right
during the 1900s the Big Crunch and Big
Bounce were front running theories and
we're even making puzzling discoveries
indicating some sort of past universe to
support this at least six months ago as
of the making of this video
did the bicep2 radio telescope of the
bicep and Keck a rally pick up what has
been described as apparent evidence for
Hawking points remnants of supermassive
black holes which evaporated in a
previous universe but whose imprints
carried over into the next one these
points represent anomalous areas of the
Cosmic Microwave Background which
appeared to be sources of vast amounts
of energy and so while models which rely
on the universe contracting have been
challenged by recent dark energy
theories the question of whether the
universe is oscillatory is still very
much up for debate
in 1998 we discovered that the universe
was not only expanding but they
expansion was accelerating and as such
the Big Crunch now has some major doubts
over it as it is believed that gravity
will not be able to counteract the
endless expansion by dark energy we
still don't understand how dark energy
works but what we do know is that it is
almost certainly bad news and there's
another pretty big problem we know the
universe began as unimaginable heat and
energy and it's called ever since down
below the different thresholds for
symmetry breaking nucleosynthesis and
chemistry to occur and it's still
calling today but with a little help
from dark energy it is on course to meet
an irreversible temperature minimum the
end of all heat in the universe also
known as the heat death or big freeze as
the name suggests it refers to the end
of all differences in heat in the
universe he is a product of energy
matter in the universe needs some kind
of energy either directly or indirectly
for things to happen and every process
that performs work and uses energy gives
off waste heat these processes proceed
in a way which reduces the availability
of the remaining energy during the
energy transfer energy flows from a
concentrated form which can be used to a
dispersed form which is useless if new
energy cannot be created then the share
of the universe's energy which is wasted
aka its entropy will continue to
increase in the far future after the
final black holes have evaporated all
energy in the universe will be in this
dispersed State entropy will be at
maximum and there won't be any
temperature energy gradient to allow
information processing simply put
nothing will ever be able to happen
again matter will gradually break apart
into radiation over a long time and the
entire universe will consist of a light
cloud of photons and even this will
decay with time it's like ice melting
into a glass of water the loss of all
gradian the big freeze will bring the
universe to just a fraction of a degree
above absolute zero at which point it
will be a homogeneous sparse skeleton
dark energy will expand this dead
unrecognizable universe to indescribable
sizes and
then perhaps it will just linger there
for an eternity
perhaps there exist ancient universities
which have already undergone he deaths
perhaps dark energy will curse the
universe so that its second Dark Age
lasts forever or perhaps it will destroy
it entirely
we are just becoming aware of dark
Energy's role in the fate of the
universe but there's still a long way to
go the discovery of accelerating
expansion of the universe is not a good
thing but the real situation could be
even worse we currently think that dark
energy remains constant throughout space
but another possibility is that it works
inversely to the normal energy fields
and its density is in fact increasing
the current density of dark energy is
very low but if this increases over time
then there's going to come a day where
it becomes denser than the structures of
the cosmos such as star as galaxies and
planets in this scenario gravity will no
longer be able to hold the structure
together and the object will be torn
apart right down to its atoms this means
that at some point in the future dark
energy will exceed a density at which
galaxies start becoming unbounded
unstable before long for planetary
systems of these stars will become
scattered and then the density of dark
energy would exceed that of planets and
every star planet and Moon is pulled
apart down to an atomic level and then
down to unbound elementary particles and
the expanding universe would be so
voluminous that no elementary particle
would ever encounter another one the
universe will be completely ripped down
to its finest pixels as some speculated
that even space-time itself would tear
and would cease to exist dark energy is
not our friend be it the big fries or a
big rip it means that the universe is
unsustainable to life hate and maybe
even its own existence
so far we've only focused on the fate of
the universe occurring everywhere but
it's possible that somewhere a random
anomaly has caused a chain of events to
take place right now which is amazing
the universe like a cancer as opposed to
a delete button this is all thanks to a
theoretical chain reaction called vacuum
decay everything in the universe wants
to reach is vacuum State aka a steady
state with as little energy as possible
the same principle applies to the
quantum fields which govern our universe
the same fields which determine the laws
for particle interaction they want to
reach their vacuum state - as far as we
know all of these fields reach their
vacuum state in the universe long ago
apart from one the Higgs field which
happens to be the field that gives
particles their mass in 2012 scientists
at CERN used the Large Hadron Collider
to identify what we think might be the
long-sought Higgs boson but when we
estimated its mass we discovered
something unsettling the Higgs field
appears stable when it actually isn't it
may be in a state of false vacuum it
appears stable because it is at a local
minimum of energy but it still has
hidden potential energy left to give
which puts it in a highly per carrier
state think of it like standing on the
edge of a cliff the universe may have to
be in this knife-edge state for stuff to
happen like the formations of stars and
galaxies but it also means that this
balance could be and inevitably will be
disturbed with disastrous consequences
for its surroundings if a quantum effect
such as quantum tunneling led to a
disturbance in the balance of the Higgs
field and a lower energy state is
possible than this hidden potential
energy will be released as the area
reaches a less energetic state and the
resulting effect on space-time is like
throwing a match into a lake filled with
petrol this point of disturbance would
create a brand new universe within hours
a so-called true vacuum this spherical
vacuum would expand outwards at the
speed of light as it releases this huge
amount of potential energy completely
destroying everything it engulfs and
leaving everything within its bounds
shredded down to his elementary
particles within this new vacuum
universe
the laws of physics would be overwritten
completely changing the properties of
elementary particles and the way they
interact chemistry and information
processing would be impossible and no
atoms or molecules can form in such an
environment the scary thing about these
theoretical bubbles is that they could
be anywhere and could start at any time
there may be bubbles of true vacuum out
there right now which are devouring
their surroundings but are too distant
to ever bother us even if one did engulf
us we'd never see it coming
they expand almost like speed and
there's no stopping them either way
everything would just be erased and
unbound down to elementary particles and
a kind of cosmic fan off snap there's no
telling how much of the universe if any
is in true vacuum state but if the share
is high enough then the majority of the
universe will have undergone this big
change into a tree vacuum state and this
may have a profound effect on the way
dark energy expands space-time maybe
even inducing the opposite effect
dark energy will begin pulling the
vacuum universe back in on itself which
may ultimately lead this event to some
variation of the Big Crunch hypothesis
it's unlikely but these vacuum bubbles
are possible and perhaps even
statistically likely to be occurring
somewhere in the vast expanse of space
luckily however because most of the
space in the universe is causally
disconnected from us as long as a bubble
never begins inside the local group we
will never be affected by other true
vacuums one of the few advantages of
being confined into this dark lonely
pocket of the ever expanding universe
[Music]
[Applause]
the big crunch the big fries the big rip
the big change these the four ways in
which our universe could meet its
destiny
in reality the heat death will likely be
the winner the Big Crunch has been all
but ruled out in its current form due to
the discovery of dark energy but perhaps
some variant of the process will give
the universe a second chance to see
another age or even a new universe
entirely our quest to know the truth
comes from our desire to find our place
in all of it will life exist after the
universe does it already exists beyond
it these are the questions that we want
to know but Humanity has far more
pressing concerns to address before the
heat death in little over 6,000 years
we've learned a staggering amount about
the nature of our universe and our
existence imagine what we could uncover
and learn if we gave ourselves a better
chance of long-term survival as a
species if the human race prevails for
thousands or even millions of years we
might be able to observe the mechanisms
that will determine our universe's
ultimate fate with our own eyes rather
than lying solely on our predictions and
equations
until that time however we know
everything will come to an end so we may
as well just enjoy the ride
[Music]
[Applause]